---
layout: post
title:  "Critiquing the Crtical Period"
excerpt: "A case study of a non-native English speaker and her stengths and shortcomings in the English Language  "
categories: jekyll update
---

Kate began learning English from a tutor while living in Ukraine around the age of 12 because her parents thought that it was an important skill to have. At time, she was already fluent in Russian and Ukrainian, as was common for people in Ukraine. Although she does not consider herself to be a great English speaker and describes hearing recordings of herself as “embarrassing”, most people, myself included report her language skills to be close to, if not on par with most native speakers. 

Kate says she finds certain sounds in English to be difficult and they are what really highlight the weaknesses in her ability to speak. She says many people notice her accent immediately, even though her tutor in Ukraine taught her to speak in what she calls a generic American or “California accent”. She says that people in America are for the most part very polite and do not correct her when she mispronounces things. She remarked on one example of the word determine in which she though it was pronounced, deter-mine, as an almost compound word or the words deter and mine and not one fluid word determine. 

However, there are times where people will not make note of her accent. Kate says she “feels like she speaks with an American accent” when she talks, even though she knows that is not the case. As with most Russian people who learn English she struggles with the “V” and “W” sounds in English and will often gloss over them in conversation. She is however able to make the “ph” sound, which is usually difficult for Russian speakers. 

When asked if she wished she had started learning English earlier, she replied no, stating that it “would not have made any difference” other than “she might be a better writer”. She said had she started later it would have been significantly harder to learn English, and that much older people would have a significantly harder time learning English and would have to invest much more time in the language to reach fluency. When asked about the critical period, she stated that there is some merit to it, but if a person were to work hard enough, there is no reason they cannot become fluent in another language. Personally, she would not want to learn another language because it would take too much time, but she believes she could still learn another language if there was a significant benefit to her, as there was with learning English. 

The part of our discussion that I found most interesting was how she described her thought process. She said that she does not think in English or Russian or Ukrainian, but rather that her thoughts are more of a “fish bowl” of words that float interchangeably in her mind. She picks and choses words in her thought process from all three languages she knows, choosing them based on context and semantic meaning rather than one language over the other. She stated that she has no idea what language she dreams in and will often find herself mentally combining words from all three of her languages to craft her thought process. Interestingly though, this is only in her thought process, and in all my conversations with her, she has never confused words and the syntax of the languages. 

I found Kate’s story to be particularly interesting as it seems to conflict with Johnson and Newport’s study that claimed the critical period starts to end after age 7 as language acquisition skills gradually begin to decline. Rather, Kate, who started at age 12, said she started at an “ideal time” and that starting any earlier would not have had much of an effect. She did however state that Russian and English have similar syntax with both being subject, verb, object languages and found it easier to pick up English because the rules were simple, and uniform compared to many rules in Russian. This claim makes me believe that the study done by Johnson and Newport would not be applicable to her, given that Russian is comparable to English. Rather, in her case, the study done by Birdsong and Moris which used two languages with a lot of similarities, English and Spanish and found that the linear decline of the critical period did not begin until age 17 and continued until age 44, would be more applicable.  

In this case, Kate seems to fit the trend well as she was well under 17 when she started English and by the time she would have reached the critical period, she would have already had been studying English for 5 years and would have been living in America for the last two of those years. It is also worth noting that Kate does still speak with a noticeable Russian accent and says she still does not understand the past participle tense in English. Although she speaks and comprehends fluently, one could argue that her accent and misunderstandings in the language may have not developed had she started learning English sooner. In that regard, her case is an example of Johnson and Newport’s critical period, but the final verdict on weather or not she is completely fluent is debatable. 

To make a conclusion that her case supports the existence of a critical period would largely be a gray area. Kate reports some people not noticing her accent and other people noticing it immediately. She claims that her ability to speak English fluctuates and some days she feels like she does better than others. Before my interview with her, I considered her to be a near perfect English speaker, except for her accent, which is a subject of debate on weather or not that affects her fluency in a language. I believe that her case is much more like Birdsong and Moris’s finding due to her belief that starting earlier would have made no difference and that I have never noticed any problems in the way she speaks and writes English. 