---
layout: post
title:  "Connecting Morality to the Environment"
excerpt: "A Critical Analysis of Turiel’s Moral Conventional Theory against the Sripada-Stitch Theory of Morality  "
categories: jekyll update
---

In this paper, I will evaluate Turiel’s moral-conventional (M/C) theory and how it holds up to Kelly and Stich’s Sripada-Stitch (S&S) theory of morality. I will begin by defining the M/C theory, the belief that the brain separates moral and conventional issues into two separate and innate mental domains and present the existing evidence in support of it. I will then explain the M/C theory’s shortcomings before introducing the S&S theory: the idea that morality comes from innate mechanisms that cause us to internalize and comply with the norms of society. I will then evaluate how the S&S theory responds to the critics of the ridged M/C theory and the M/C theory’s rebuttals. I will consider, but ultimately reject the M/C theory of morality as I believe a gray area exists in morality and that immoral actions are not entirely distinct from moral actions. This distinction or lack thereof matters in the role of guiding human judgement as M/C theorists believe moral issues are serious,authority independent, and non-negotiable issues that are thought to be overarching and disqualifying characteristics of a person’s character, while S&S theorists treat morals as merely a type of norm.  

Turiel’s M/C theory states that there are two distinct types of issues humans innately distinguish between, moral issues and conventional issues. A moral issue is “an objective prescriptive force not dependent on authority” (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 7). Turiel believes that moral issues must have four distinct qualities, namely they must exist independent of authority, cause harm, be generalizable, and invoke seriousness (Kelly &  Stitch, 2007, p. 7). Murder would be an example of a moral issue in that the issue is seen as wrong regardless of what the law says, there is a clear victim in the issue, it is generalizable and not unique to one society, and it is an action with serious repercussions.

Conventional issues are “local and arbitrary situation dependent rules” intended to keep structure and order in a community (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 7). These rules are authority dependent and lack harm to a victim or individual and without authority would not be a violation. For example, if it were to become socially acceptable for a boy to wear a dress, it would not be an issue for a boy to wear a dress, because such an issue is conventional. Rather fashion and what people can wear is tied to society and a product what society deems acceptable, not something that is innately known to be wrong like murdering someone.

Note the way in which the prior conventional example, a boy wearing a dress lacks harm and is not a moral issue. Turiel believes that the four characteristics of morality are innate and pancultural and that in any moral issue all four characteristics must be present. The innateness and interconnectedness of the four characteristics of morality are what causes morality to be an overriding issue and what separates a moral issue from a conventional issue. The M/C theory treats morality as something sacred and overriding. If someone is immoral, there is no question that negatively impacts their character, regardless of what else they have done.  
 
Turiel supports his M/C theory with an experiment he calls the “moral/conventional distinction” (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 7). In this experiment, Turiel asks people about characteristically moral and conventional rules, with moral rules being rules that invoke harm and by extension the other characteristics of morality and conventional rules being those that lack the four moral characteristics. Turiel would give the participants several conventional and moral rules and ask if they considered the rule to be wrong and if so how wrong. He would then ask if they believed the wrongness of the rule depended on authority, if the rule was inherently morally wrong, if the rule was general is scope, and if the justification of the rule caused harm (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 7). 
 
The results of Turiel’s moral-conventional distinction task suggested the issues deemed as moral issues aligned with all four of the characteristics of morality (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 7). Likewise conventional issues were lacking in moral characteristics and were authority dependent (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 7). Because of this, Turiel believes that morality is strictly defined by the existence of all four of these characteristics and that the distinction between moral rules and conventional rules is “psychologically realand important” (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 6). 
 
Turiel finds the characteristic distinction between moral and conventional rules found in the moral-conventional distinction to exist in “an impressively diverse set of subjects, ranging from toddlers to adults” and in a “substantial array of different nationalities and religions” (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 8). He believes this is a result of the universality of morals in that if morals were to come from the environment, they would not hold the same characteristics and ideals across cultures and age ranges. 
 
Kelly and Stitch see an inherent flaw in the way that Turiel’s theory defines morality: Turiel’s need for the existence of all four of the moral characteristics to exist to create a moral issue. Kelly and Stitch believe that there are moralized cases without harm and cases of harm that are not moralized that confound Turiel’s interconnected principles of morality.
 
In the case of morality without harm, if a brother and a sister were to agree to have consensual and safe sex such that no harm or danger exists, many people will still see this as a moral issue. According to Turiel, there either must be harm, which given that both parties were consenting and not running any risks of pregnancy or disease there is not, or this must not be a moral issue. However, many people will seemingly innately call incest morally wrong, regardless of the circumstances. In this case, the immorality seems to stem from disgust rather than harm and thus violates Turiel’s need for all four characteristics to be present 
for a moral issue to exist. 
  
In the case of harm without morality, consider a sailor being beaten for disobeying orders. In this case, the sailor is harmed and becomes a victim, but many people would not consider this to be a moral issue even though the solider is clearly harmed and harm should justify an overriding moral issue. Rather, it appears the environment and conditions of the situation justify the situation. If this were in fact a moral issue, justification should be impossible because the M/C theory entails that morality is overarching and unaffected by the environment. 
  
Kelly and Stitch do not attempt to solve the problems with the M/C theory, but instead abandon the M/C theory altogether calling it “seriously mistaken” (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 12). Kelly and Stitch instead propose the Sripada and Stitch (S&S) theory which holds that instead of morality being an innate and pancultural feature of humans, morality is a norm of society and rather than morality itself being innate, the acquisition of norms is innate (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 2).
  
Kelly and Stitch define norms as a prescription of behavior: an ought (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 3). For example, it is a societal norm not to kill people; we ought to not kill people. Likewise, it is a norm for boys not to wear dresses; they ought to not wear dresses. The S&S theory does not draw a definitive black and white distinction between moral and convention issues, but rather believes both to be norms of society. 
   
The S&S theory ties the obligation to act on moral issues as the same reason to comply with norms, to avoid  punishment for violating them (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 1). In this sense, morality is not an innate overriding part of character, but a norm that triggers an emotional response or a particularly strong societal norm that we comply with to avoid punishment. This distinction seeks to avoid the problems incurred by the M/C theory, namely the existence of moral issues without harm and conventional issues with harm, by not drawing a distinction between morals and norms. 

Kelly and Stitch believe moral norms are acquired through the “innate mechanism dedicated to norm acquisition” (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 4). The S&S theory holds that people take in cues from the environment through their acquisition mechanism and once acquired, the norms “give rise to reliable and robust intrinsic motivation to comply with the norm” or face the punishment of violating them (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 4). The means of acquiring norms is called the “execution mechanism” (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 4) and is based around our motivation to act to avoid such a punishment. Rather than morals being these overriding and universally understood principles humans abide by, the S&S theory proposes they are merely norms with more serious consequences or emotional charges put in place to keep order in society. 

The S&S theory does state some distinction exists between moral norms and conventional norms but explains the difference as the seriousness of the norm’s violation as opposed to something that is innately wrong. The S&S mechanism of acquisition creates “intrinsic motivation to comply with rules, detect violations, and generate intrinsic motivation to punish violators” (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 5). In the case of moral norms, these norms are rules with more severe punishments and repercussions in society and are not entirely distinct from conventional norms. 

The S&S theory disregards the innateness of morals and states that our “innate cognitive architecture gives rise to the individual and social factors that make up the norms” (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 2) that form morality. This view accounts for the similarities across cultural norms in the M/C distinction task by making the creation of norms and by extension the creation of morals innate. Thus, it is required that everyone has morals and norms and they may often be similar, but they do not have to be the same. 

The S&S theory does not require a strict definition of morality like the M/C theory. Because of this, Kelly and Stitch allow for cases of morality without harm and harm without morality as the S&S theory does not treat morality as universal, but subjective and relative to society. In the case of beating the sailors, the issue may not have been a moral issue 300 years ago because the cultural norms the sailors abide by made it normal to beat unruly sailors. The people of the time period do not have the necessary conditions to consider the severity of the situation as it is already an existing norm that sailors can be beaten if unruly. The addition of harm does not make the issue much different than that of an existing norm; many people will still argue that it is not a moral issue (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 18). 

Kelly and Stitch elaborate on the historical contexts of morality and how morality can be subject to change across time without the circumstances or definition changing. In the example of whipping an unruly sailor, 52% of participants said that it was okay to do so if the event occurred 300 years ago, while only 8% said it was okay if it occurred today (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 18). This inconsistency in morals across time should not be possible if the M/C theory is true as the theory believes moral and conventional rules to be strictly defined by a static and innate definition. In the case of the beaten sailor, a gray area, in which morals seem to be subject to change exists which should not be possible according to the strict definition of the M/C theory. 

The sailor case is also a case which involves harm, so it should trigger the moral system of the brain according to the M/C theory, but only 8% of people today seem to believe this is a moral issue (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 18). Rather, it seems that the morality of this issue is largely tied to the environment and norms of the time period, even in cases when the people evaluating the morality of the situation do not observe the same norms as the people of that time period. If morality were truly innately defined and distinct from conventional in the human mind, it would require that the moral issues remain constant overtime. Rather, the inconsistencies across time seem to suggest morality is a subjective norm tied to human environments.  

However, there are some notable rebuttals to Kelly and Stitch’s criticisms of the M/C theory. Susan Dwyer, a prominent moral conventionalist, believes that morality must be innate because of how early and quickly it forms in children. She employs what Kelly and Stitch call a variation of the “poverty of the stimulus”, believing that children could not form the complex moral judgements shown in Turiel’s experiments from the limited environment and experience children have (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 12). Dwyer purposes that the need to define what is and is not moral and the consistencies found within the responses of the M/C task must be innate because children do not have the sufficient stimulus from the environment to acquire such complex views of morality. The results of the M/C distinction consistently showed similar identifications of moral and conventional rules despite children lacking the experience or complex thought processes required to label something as moral or conventional based on their environment. 

Kelly and Stitch’s response to this would be that the S&S theory states that the acquisition of norms and by extension morality is innate, just not the existence of norms. Humans are not born with norms or morality, but the ability to acquire norms and by extension morals. Specifically, Kelly and Stitch state that “all children have some norms by the age of 4-5” (Kelly & Stitch, 2007, p. 3). They go on to state that these early norms appear across culture and hold similar, but not the same ideas. By equating norms and morality, Kelly and Stitch can account for the early forming ideas of morality without accepting the innate distinction between the moral and the conventional as they believe this distinction to be inherently problematic. 

Turiel would respond to this problem by stating that there is a misunderstanding as to what defines a harm. Turiel believes there is a distinction between the nature of morality and moral judgements. In previous times whipping a sailor was not seen as a harm, but that does not mean the case is not a moral issue. It
means the people did not have the necessary and sufficient conditions to make the correct moral judgement about the nature of morality. A harm is not defined by the fact that it is wrong, but when a harm exists it is a moral issue. In the sailor case, there is clearly still a harm and the case aligns with the definition of a moral issue, but the moral judgements of the people are insufficient. Thus the example is a moral issue in nature, but the morality of the situation is not properly assessed by the people evaluating the moral nature of the issue. 

I believe there are infinite cases of moral and conventional issues and endless debates about what defines a certain moral rule in a specific circumstance. The root of the argument between the two sides hinges on trying to define something that is abstract and, in my opinion, has no clear definition. Although I admire Turiel for trying to concretely define morality, I find that his decision to define morality is in and of itself problematic. Moral and conventional issues are subject to change and variable as in the case of whipping the sailor or having safe and consensual incest, or any number of cases. I agree with the S&S theory’s decision to tie morals to norms as it accounts for distinctions in morals and gives a foundation to explain what morality is without overstretching its boundaries like the M/C theory. 

Because I believe the S&S theory to be a more accurate representation of morality than the M/C theory, I will now explain the implications of the S&S theory’s role of morals in society. The M/C theory holds the violation of morals to be disqualifying characteristics; characteristics that taint the character of someone. If you murder someone, you are an inherently bad and immoral person. The M/C theory treats morality as something sacred and inborn in humans, but if the S&S theory is true, it brings into question the importance of moral issues. The S&S theory equates morals and norms, significantly downplaying the importance of morals, referring to them as inventions of society rather than sacred, overriding issues.
   
In the case of safe and consensual incest and beating an unruly sailor, the people that performed the immoral actions are not typically viewed as immoral people. Likewise, someone who calls themself a moral vegetarian or sees the morality of not eating meat because it causes the suffering of animals, does not condemn all people that eat meat as immoral. That would be a very large segment of the population to call immoral, but nevertheless, vegetarianism, much like beating sailors, invokes a harm and therefore should be a moral issue. However, if it is a true moral issue, according the M/C theory, the violation of the moral issue should taint one’s character. All three cases lack the severity and condemnation that Turiel believes to be intrinsically tied to morality despite causing harm and thus being supposed moral issues. 
    
People often claim that they take the moral high ground or that it is important to make moral decisions as morality is often seen as a vital part of human nature. However, the S&S theory suggests that morality is hardly different than any other norm and that human behavior is guided by norms. These norms may not even be considered moral as morality is subjective and tied to society and not an innate moral distinction in the human mind. This does not mean that proposed moral issues are not severe and there are no implications to killing people. Rather, it ties morality, something many people hold to be sacred and a guiding force in their behavior to the environment. In this sense, our actions are the product of our environment, even in the most severe and emotionally charged situations. 
     
References
Kelly, D., & Stich, S. (2007). Two Theories About the Cognitive Architecture Underlying Morality. The Innate Mind, 3: 348-366.