---
layout: post
title:  "Distinguishing between Evolution and Representational States"
excerpt: "A Reply to Rountree and Millikan"
categories: jekyll update
---

In this paper, I will defend Pietroski’s thought experiment about the snorfs and kimus from Rountree’s critiques about the belief states of kimus, invalidating Millikan’s Biosemantics. I will begin by defining teleosemantic theories and then explain how Millikan’s teleological Biosemantics uses evolution to define proper function and representation in organisms through a consumer system modeling the external world. I will then present Pietroski’s thought experiment about the snorfs and the kimus and how it shows a disjunction between belief and biological evolution that invalidates Biosemantics. I will consider, but ultimately reject Millikan’s claim that the B-tokens in kimus represent a snorf-free zone because of the clear lack of kimu’s understanding of what a snorf is and her use of unintuitive, intransitive logic. I will then present Rountree’s claim that the kimu example does not apply to Biosemantics because kimus are too simple to be believers, but reject it because of its over simplification and unfair characterization of Pietroski’s example, the complexity of kimus, and the directness of B-tokens relative to their cause, the color of the sun setting. 

Teleosemantic theories of mental content define the content of a symbol by its proper function or teleofunction. This teleofunction is the function “the object was selected for” (Millikan 284); the function an object does in its normal conditions. For example, a heart is characterized by its primary purpose of pumping blood. Thus, a teleologist would be inclined to say something is a heart if it pumps blood. Teleosemantics uses proper function to define the content of a representation, but each teleological theory defines this proper function differently.

Teleological theories work well in describing content that has a clear function or purpose from a designer. A car was designed to transport people and in normal conditions, cars transport people. The function of the car is clear as it was specifically designed by an engineer with an intended purpose. Even if the purpose is not served, say the car has a flat tire, its teleofunction is still to transport people. The car is simply then not in its normal conditions and not functioning properly and thus is not performing its proper teleofunction, to transport people in normal conditions. A case where the car has a flat tire is abnormal and does not change the meaning of content. The car is still a car because under normal conditions it can transport people.  

Millikan’s Biosemantics is a naturalistic teleological theory that seeks to define the teleofunction or proper function of humans and other complex organisms by defining function based on natural selection. The normal conditions of the organism and its teleofunction are tied to how something performs in its natural environment and are required to give a full account of the object’s proper function (Millikan 285).  To define the content of a representation, we must define the normal conditions and proper function of an object relative to its consumer system. This is similar to the car case, but organisms lack a clear designer or statement of purpose. There is no engineer that designs a human; Millikan believes nature is the designer of organisms through natural selection.

Let’s say that hearts are defined by their function to pump blood as they evolved to pump blood. Even though a heart may stop pumping blood when someone dies, that does not make the person’s heart not a heart. “Proper functions are determined by the histories of the items possessing them” (Millikan 284). Someone’s heart has the evolutionary history of their ancestor’s hearts: pumping blood. Thus, the function that it performed in its normal conditions as defined by the heart’s evolution, pumping blood inside a body, defines the content of the heart, allowing us to conclude a heart is a thing that pumps blood. 

It is important to realize that the normal conditions are the conditions that allow the organism “to behave in accordance with its design” (Millikan 284) and not the typical or most common conditions but the “historically optimal conditions” (Millikan 284). These are the conditions under which an organism can perform its naturally selected proper function, but these may not be common conditions. The average male produces millions of sperm cells in a lifetime, but only a handful of the sperm cells will perform their proper function of fertilizing an egg. If every sperm where in its normal conditions and performed its proper function, the Earth would have a massive overpopulation problem. Nonetheless, a sperm cell is still characterized by its ability to fertilize eggs, its proper function or evolutionary purpose. Thus, something is a sperm cell if it can fertilize an egg and is still a sperm cell if it doesn’t fertilize an egg as it still has the proper function of fertilizing an egg in normal conditions.

Millikan believes that the proper function of the consumer system defines the representation of the object through correspondence rules. In a representative relationship, there is a producer of a signal, the signal or representation itself, and the consumer of the representation. Intuitive thought may tell us that the producer defines the meaning of a representation as they are the one who intends the meaning. However, Millikan believes that we should “focus on representation consumption rather than production” (Millikan 283) as the consumer plays the key role in determining “what it is to use a thing as a representation” (Millikan 285). 

Millikan cites a number of examples to show how the consumer system defines the content of a representation. Consider honeybees, which “perform dances to indicate the location of sources of nectar they have discovered” (Millikan 288). These dances are intricate and have specific movements and tempos to indicate the location of a potential food source. These dances carry significant meaning when interoperated by another bee but mean nothing to the average human who has no knowledge of what a bee dance is for or how to interoperate the representation as the location of nectar. 

It is the consumer of the dance signal, another bee, that can create the representation of where the nectar is located through an interpreter mechanism.  The proper function of the dance, to signal the location of the nectar, is not achieved unless there is an interpreter mechanism, another bee, to interoperate and give meaning to the representation. This makes the representation of the dance more specific than the dance alone and more so a representation of a “dance-at-a-time-in-a-place -at-a-tempo-with-an-orientation” than only the dance signal produced by the producer (Millikan 288). 

The normal conditions, the presence of nectar, and consumer of the signal, another bee, must be present for the dance to have any meaning or proper function. Otherwise, the consumer cannot use correspondence rules to link the represented symbol of the dance to the nectar in the outside world that gives the symbol its meaning. The content of a symbol is derived from the correspondence of the proper function of the consumer in relation to the outside world the signal models. This enables the signal to create a semantic meaning for the consumer system to model the world in normal conditions in much the same way a word such as “cup” denotes the physical meaning of a cup in the world: by mapping the word to the presence of a physical cup, the cup’s normal conditions. 

Millikan’s Biosemantics presents an effective way of naturally generalizing concrete producer and consumer relationships of representations and defining a proper function and designer of beliefs. She makes use of one of the most concrete forms of understanding available to humans, science and seemingly generalizes science to the intuitive content of representations and understanding. 

However, Millikan is not without critics and a variety of philosophers have been quick to point out Biosemantics shortcomings. Daniel Dennett has trouble conceptualizing proper function and questions whether or not it exists at all on the basis of intentionality being derived from the environment and not the consumer. Crystal L’Hote believes that proper function in Biosemantics is inadequate because it uses natural selection and requires an evolutionary history for representations to exist. Specifically, L’Hote believes that Biosemantics is inadequate in explaining and representing new objects like televisions and computers that have no evolutionary history in nature and in representing ideas that do not exist but still have representations like unicorns. 

The focus of this paper is not on either L’Hote’s or Dennett’s objections, but on what I consider to be the most damming to Biosemantics: Pietroski’s thought experiment about the kimus and the snorfs. L-Hote and Dennet both go about trying to invalid Biosemantics on the premise that proper function is incorrect. While I believe there is validity to their arguments and that they should be addressed, Pietroski’s reductio argument accepts Biosemantics and proper function and gives a case in which natural selection and representation exist apart from each other. From my perspective, this portrays the root of the problem for Millikan’s representation by creating a mismatch between evolution and intention, meaning that evolution does not define representation.

Pietroski’s thought experiment describes a fictional creature called a kimu (Pietroski 273). Kimus have always been color  blind until one kimu developed the ability to see the color red. This new found sight prompted the kimu to climb a large hill every night to watch the sunset, which was evolutionarily advantageous as there are creatures that kill kimus called snorfs that hunt in the valley at night. Because of the absence of snorfs on the hill at night, the ability to see red became evolutionarily advantageous as it kept kimus from their predators and eventually natural selection made it such that all kimus could see the color red and started climbing the hill to watch the sunset.

Biosemantics derives the meaning of content from what something evolves to do. In the case of climbing the hill, the kimu’s proper function in climbing the hill would be because it has no snorfs. The kimus are representing a snorf-free zone. From an evolutionary standpoint this makes sense, but from the representational perspective of the kimus, this is ridiculous as intuitively the kimus are representing B-tokens as the color red. One could argue the B-tokens kimus form when they climb the hill could mean anything from redness, wavelength, the sun, a hill, etc., but are not about snorfs (Pietroski 273). Rather, “the instantiation of snorfness can and does explain the proliferation of the kimu’s mechanism (to see red) without B-tokens ever being caused by snorfs” (Pietroski 274). There is a clear disjunction between the obvious represented content of the kimus and the evolutionary purpose of the kimus proper function. The first is about color or B tokens and the latter is about survival. Thus, because there is a case in which evolution does not give us the correct representation, Biosemantics must not characterize representations properly. 

Millikan’s response is that the B-tokens “signify roughly fewer snorfs over there” (Pietroski 274). She claims there exists a correlation between the absence of snorfs and the color red the kimus go to look at when the sun sets that should, when evolution is considered, be sufficient to create a representation of snorf free zone. B-tokens gave snorfs the evolutionary history to seek out snorf free zones as their ancestors historically avoided snorfs by following B-tokens. Millikan believes that there is a sufficient positive correlation in the kimu’s evolution between B-tokens and the absence of snorfs to make the B-tokens about snorfs. Thus, the kimus would be climbing the hill because they believe it is snorfless as in their evolutionary history, it has never had snorfs.

This correlation between B-tokens and snorflessness is meant to act as a form of indirect transitive logic. The sun setting causes the B-tokens in kimus that they then follow to what they have learned is safety from their history. They represent safety as B-tokens in the form of the color red. The behavior of a kimu in every way suggests that there is a belief about safety and the absence of snorfs at the top of the hill. Thus, their beliefs about B-tokens and the B-tokens’ proliferation  are tied to the absence of snorfs in the presence of B-tokens, making B-tokens about the lack of snorfs as Biosemantics would suggest. 

Pietroski finds Millikan’s transitive relationship between B-tokens and snorfs to undercut the directness of teleological representations that makes them appealing in the first place (Pietroski 277). Teleological theories are appealing because they show a direct relationship between a symbol and content that we can attribute to meaning. The B-tokens being about a snorf-free zone undercuts this direct relationship because it goes against what direct logic and intention would tell us, that the B-tokens are about color. 

The distinction between B-tokens and snorfs is particularly relevant in the case in which a kimu were to see a snorf. In such a case, the kimu only has B-tokens and does not know anything about snorfs. If a snorf was put in front of a kimu, the kimu would not have any idea how to react to it as the B-tokens are unrelated to snorfs and thus not defined by snorfs. For all we know, the snorfs could be red creatures and the kimus could be drawn to the snorfs. This thought experiment would still hold because kimus have no concept of the snorf or the lack of snorfs. The continued survival of the kimu population is however linked to snorf avoidance. Nonetheless, the representation of B-tokens and the existence of kimus continues unaware to the kimus or their thoughts or lack thereof thoughts about snorfs.  

I am under the impression that there is no reason besides Biosemantics to think the B-tokens from the color red are about snorfs at all due to the lack of the kimu’s existence of any tokens about snorfs. To say that the kimu’s B-tokens represent a snorf free zone is ridiculous as no present kimu has ever seen a snorf or has a concept of what one is. Pietroski humorously says “a kimus could not distinguish a snorf from a hole in the wall” (Pietroski 276) and he makes an excellent
point. To a modern day kimu, everything is a snorf-free zone, not just B-tokens, as kimus have no representation of snorfs at all. Organisms cannot intend to represent the absence of something if they have never represented the presence of it. Claiming that a B-token represents snorf free is thus impossible as there is no representation of a snorf to claim there is any representation of snorf-free. It is much easier and more direct to simply claim B-tokens are about the sun setting as there is a direct causal relationship between the two and the kimus can represent the colors of the sun as they evolved to do so. 

Critics of Pietroski such as James Rountree and Crawford Elder favor the view that the B-tokens are about the absence of snorfs. I am under the impression that they are not as indirect logic has no place in teleological theory as it gets away from the directness of representation that makes the theory intuitive.  However, Rountree and Elder also consider the idea that Kimus may not be believers at all, but mere representors. If this were the case, this would preserve Biosemantics as the kimu’s B-tokens would lack intention sufficient for a belief to exist, and the case would not apply to Biosemantics as it characterizes a simple representation and not a belief. The next section of this paper will focus on Rountree’s rebuttal to Pietroski, that the kimus, as Pietroski depicts them, are too simple to have beliefs and thus are not affected by Biosemantics. 

Rountree draws a distinction between beliefs and mere representational states. He believes that representational states are “non-branching” and “never lead to different behavioral outcomes or get input from other representational states” (Rountree 412). They are simple concepts of basic organisms like bacteria or insects that move on impulse of a representation. The representation is not a complex behavioral pattern, but rather a simple movement. Beliefs on the other hand are more complex than mere representations and “contain information from a variety of proximal sources” like sense and memory and engage in varying and complex interactions (Rountree 412). Beliefs are subject to intention, interpretation, and variation to a degree that does not exist in simple representations but are the basis of Biosemantics’ derivation of meaning. 

Rountree differentiates how beliefs and representations play out in the behavior of an organism to define what is and is not a believer. He believes that beliefs require a diverse sensory input and understanding by a complex organism and the organism has to devote a large amount of resources to developing these systems with little to no evolutionary benefit. In the case of the kimus, evolution would more likely have them represent a B-token which they enjoy and flock towards but have no beliefs about as it would serve the same evolutionary purpose as a belief but require less resources and complexity. 

According to Rountree, there is no reason to believe that the representations of kimus are any more complex than the most basic of organisms’ impulses. He points to specific quotes by Pietroski about “gormless trudging towards sources of red” and “a complete inability to sense predators even as they bear down upon them” (414). Any organism that runs towards its prey because of a basic stimulus is most likely lacking any intellect necessary for beliefs and thus is irrelevant to the beliefs defined by Biosemantics. 

Pietroski provides little detail about the complexity of kimu’s actions or behaviors because he needs to paint a very specific picture about the belief states of kimus, one that when more complex details are present, he worries will not apply. Rountree’s goal is that in expanding the details of the kimu’s history such that kimu’s can be consider believers, he will distance the relationship between B-tokens and the color red and make the apparent role of the snorfs in the representation seem less indirect comparatively. 

Rountree notes the lack of description about the snorfs and kimus: why snorfs only go to the valley at night, why kimus are so vulnerable, how seeing red impacts the rest of the kimus’ lives etc. Rountree takes the simplicity and elegancy of the snorfs and kimus thought experiment and uses it to argue that the example does not apply to Biosemantics as the kimus are mere representors and lack the necessary complex sensory input and interactivity of behavior to have complex beliefs. If more details about the kimus were given, or better yet a real-life example, then the relationship between B-tokens and the color red would not be as clear and distinct as the kimus would then have sufficient complexity for true beliefs. This complexity of behavior and beliefs would cause beliefs about snorfs or at least survival and safe zones when B-tokens occur. Without beliefs, the example does not apply to Biosemantics and the B-tokens do not have to mean snorf-free zone as they are not beliefs at all and thus do not derive intentional mental content. 
 
Rountree’s response leaves Pietroski with one option to preserve his argument: to reaffirm Kimus are believers. I am under the impression that Rountree’s claim that kimus are not believers is an attempt to circumnavigate the problem of indirect and unintuitive ascriptions of mental content in Biosemantics by dodging the question. I believe that there was enough detail given to claim that kimus can and do have beliefs based on their actions. The absence of detail on how the kimu’s sensory capacity and behaviors function was more to avoid irrelevant or excessive details than it was due to the absence of beliefs or complexity of the kimus. 
 
Rountree points out a number of things that he considers to be flaws in the snorfs and kimus thought experiment, but I believe that most of them are irrelevant and do not apply to the example or ascription of beliefs. He criticizes Pietroski for not fleshing out more details about the predator-prey relationship between snorfs and kimus as he believes more details about it will distance the relationship between kimus and B-tokens. Specifically, he comments on why kimus are so vulnerable and why snorfs cannot climb hills. 
 
There are many simple answers to this such as kimus are very small and snorfs have short legs, but these details seem extraneous and do not impact or distance B-tokens from the kimus or the color red. It is still the B-tokens and not the kimu’s size or snorf’s short legs that cause the kimus to go up the hill. If we were to look at a kimu’s mental processes, it would have nothing to do with the snorfs’ inability to climb the hill or even the kimus’ ability to climb the hill, but instead the presence of B-tokens in their beliefs about the top of the hill. This move by Rountree is an attempt to try to make the obvious direct comparison between B-tokens and red less obvious in the scope of evolution and purpose. However, this distance results only from trying to make the example fit with Millikan’s Biosemantics and not because of actual psychological states. It is much more intuitive and in line with traditional direct teleosemantic views to make the B-tokens about color than snorfs even in light of additional details or complexity.

Rountree’s insistence on the simplicity of the nature of kimus comes largely from quotes out of context in Pietroski’s paper. His references to “kimus not knowing asnorf from a hole in the wall” or kimus drudging directly towards red snorfs are unfair characterizations of the descriptions of kimus provided by Pietroski (Rountree408). These claims were not made to characterize the nature of kimus, but to show how removed kimus are from snorf related representations and should not be treatedas examples of the kimu’s complexity. 
 
If introduced to a new predator an organism had never seen before in their evolutionary history, it would only be logical for the species to not respond to it. Consider when people first landed on the Galagoes Islands, islands that had not been visited by humans, the animals there were unaware that humans were harmful and thus flocked towards the mysterious new but dangerous creatures. The lack of knowledge about humans and their dangers at the time does not undercut the beliefs and representational complexity of every animal on the island that flocked towards the mysterious new humans. It also certainly does not make every animal on the island’s responses akin the complexity to bacterial responses. Instead, it shows a lack of representation about a predator due to a lack of evolutionary history about the humans. This lack of representation is present in the kimu’s supposed simplistic behavior as Pietroski clearly mentions that kimus have never seen snorfs and thus have no way of knowing if they are dangerous. Not knowing of danger makes the kimus easily picked off by snorfs when they do appear, but this is very rare as kimu’s have evolved B-tokens that indirectly and intransitively allowed them to avoid snorfs such that kimus never represent snorfs in the first place. 
  
There are undoubtedly an infinite number of possible kimu and snorf situations and details in their evolution. I believe that focusing on them is counterintuitive and counterproductive as it only tries to distance a clear, direct and conflicting representational belief from its non-evolutionary cause. At the heart of Pietroski’s argument is the idea that intentional states and beliefs are not biological concerns, but psychological concerns. As argued by Josefa Toribio, our beliefs are tied to our mental processes and not our evolutionary history. This is evident in the kimus and can be used to explain many common cases that Millikan cites, as evolution can impact and shape belief states, but it is not the underlying and end all be all of belief states. 
  
In conclusion, Millikan’s Biosemantics is flawed in its equation of biological states and psychological states. While it works well in many cases like bees dancing, the proper function of an organism as determined by evolution and the consumer does not always align with its representation and beliefs. This is evident in Pietroski’s kimus who clearly believe, and not just represent that B-tokens are about their perception of the color red and not the cause of evolutionary proliferation of B-tokens, the lack of snorfs in an area. 
  
References
Dennett, Daniel C. (1988). Evolution, error and intentionality. In _The Intentional Stance_. MIT Press.
Elder, Crawford L. (1998). What versus How in Naturally Selected Representations. Oxford Journals. Oxford University Press.
L’Hote, Crystal. (2009). Biosemantics: An Evolutionary Theory of Thought. Evolution Education and Outreach. Saint Michael’s College.
Millikan, Ruth G. (1989). Biosemantics. The Journal of Philosophy. University of Connecticut.
Pietroski, Paul M. (1992). Intentionality and Teleological Error. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly. University of Southern California.
Rountree, James. (1997). The Plausibility of Teleological Content Ascriptions: A Reply to Pietroski. Blackwell Publishers. University of Southern California. 
Toribio, Josefa. (1998). Meaning and Other Non-Biological Categories. Philosophical Papers. Washington University in St. Louis.